Added getting started and authentication page (#224)
mautic/developer-documentation-new: docs/rest_api/authentication.rst

.. code-block:: bash

    curl -X POST \
         -H "Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded" \
         -d "grant_type=client_credentials&client_id=CLIENT_ID&client_secret=CLIENT_SECRET" \
         https://mautic.example.com/oauth/v2/token

Client credentials response
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "access_token": "NEW_ACCESS_TOKEN",
        "expires_in": 3600,
        "token_type": "bearer",
        "scope": ""
    }

.. note::

   Store this data securely and use it to authenticate future API requests.

Authenticating the API request
==============================

Authenticating API requests with OAuth2 is straightforward. Choose one of the following methods.

Authorization header
--------------------

The Authorization header enables authentication for all Mautic API endpoints.

This method requires the Mautic server to pass headers to PHP or provide access to the ``apache_request_headers()`` function. Note that ``apache_request_headers()`` is unavailable when running PHP under FastCGI.

.. code-block:: bash

    Authorization: Bearer ACCESS_TOKEN

Other methods
-------------

> While the preferred method is to send the access token in the ``Authorization: Bearer`` header, you may alternatively include it in the ``POST`` body when using ``application/x-www-form-urlencoded`` if your client cannot set custom headers. Avoid putting access tokens in URL query strings, since server logs, browser history, and ``Referer`` headers often record URLs and can inadvertently expose your token.

Reviewer: Also applied the copilot suggestion here.

.. vale off

.. note::

   The content for this page requires a major update. The legacy page contains outdated and potentially inaccurate information. You can still access it in the :xref:`legacy repository`.

   If you're interested in helping develop the new content for this page and others, consider joining the documentation efforts.

   Please read the :xref:`dev docs contributing guidelines` and :xref:`Contributing to Mautic’s documentation` to get started.

> .. vale on

Reviewer 2: Can we drop this when we are making a new entry to the docs?

Reviewer: As long as the existing content in the page is still valid (not outdated) when we're making new entries, I don't see why not we remove this note.

But if the content is moved from legacy docs and hasn't been verified that it's up to date, I think we better keep it so folks can be aware that it might need update and are welcome to update.

Reviewer 2: I didn't notice any outdated info.

Reviewer 3: @adiati98 let's remove this if the content is good.

Reviewer: Noted. I'll remove this and notes from other PRs that @escopecz has approved. 👍🏼

         https://mautic.example.com/oauth/v2/token

Client credentials response
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "access_token": "NEW_ACCESS_TOKEN",
        "expires_in": 3600,
        "token_type": "bearer",
        "scope": ""
    }

.. note::

   Store this data securely and use it to authenticate future API requests.

Authenticating the API request
==============================

Authenticating API requests with OAuth2 is straightforward. Choose one of the following methods.

Authorization header
--------------------

The Authorization header enables authentication for all Mautic API endpoints.

This method requires the Mautic server to pass headers to PHP or provide access to the ``apache_request_headers()`` function. Note that ``apache_request_headers()`` is unavailable when running PHP under FastCGI.

.. code-block:: bash

    Authorization: Bearer ACCESS_TOKEN

Other methods
-------------

You can append the access token to the query string or include it in the ``POST`` body when using ``x-www-form-urlencoded``.

.. code-block:: bash
    
    GET https://mautic.example.com/api/leads?access_token=ACCESS_TOKEN

.. code-block:: bash

> 

Reviewer 3: I think this is valid - any thoughts @mautic/security-team ?

> 

Reviewer 2: Yes, I'd merge this 👍

Basic authentication
********************

To get started quickly with Mautic's API, you can use Basic Authentication.

.. note::

    Mautic recommends OAuth2 for security reasons. If you still want to use Basic Authentication, you must first enable it in ``Configuration -> API Settings`` in the Mautic UI, or by setting ``'api_enable_basic_auth' => true`` in ``app/config/local.php`` directly.

After enabling Basic Authentication, you can use it in Mautic's API as follows:

Using Mautic's API library with ``BasicAuth``
=============================================

.. code-block:: php

   <?php
   
   use GuzzleHttp\Client;
   use Mautic\Auth\ApiAuth;
   use Mautic\MauticApi;

   // Initiate an HTTP Client
   $httpClient = new Client([
       'timeout'  => 10,
   ]);

   // Initiate the auth object
   $settings = [
       'userName' => 'YOUR_USERNAME',
       'password' => 'YOUR_PASSWORD'
   ];
   $apiUrl = 'https://mautic.example.com';

   $initAuth = new ApiAuth($httpClient);
   $auth     = $initAuth->newAuth($settings, 'BasicAuth');

   $api         = new MauticApi();
   $contactsApi = $api->newApi('contacts', $auth, $apiUrl);
   $contacts    = $contactsApi->getList();

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

.. vale off
```

Let's turn off Vale here as we are purposely going against the grammar rules to use a specific term.

Plain HTTP requests

> ===================

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
===================

.. vale on
```

Turn it back on here.

       'clientSecret' => 'adf8asf7sf54asf3as4f5sf6asfasf97dd', // A Client Secret can be created in Mautic's UI through the "API Credentials" menu item
       'callback'     => 'https://example.com/your-callback'
   );

   // Initiate the auth object
   $initAuth = new ApiAuth();
   $auth     = $initAuth->newAuth($settings, 'OAuth');

   // Initiate process for obtaining an access token; this method will redirect the user to the authorize endpoint and/or set the tokens when the user is redirected back after granting authorization
   if ($auth->validateAccessToken()) {
       if ($auth->accessTokenUpdated()) {
           $accessTokenData = $auth->getAccessTokenData();

           // store the access token data however you want
       }
   }

Using plain OAuth2 for the Authorization Code flow
--------------------------------------------------

.. note::

   The OAuth processes can be tricky. If possible, it's best to use an OAuth library for the language that's used. If you're using PHP, Mautic recommends using the :xref:`Mautic API Library`.

Step one - obtain authorization code

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 3: These should be ~~~~ rather than ^^^^

Redirect the User to the authorize endpoint ``/oauth/v2/authorize``:

.. code-block:: console

    # NOTE: navigate to this URL in the browser as it renders the login form
    https://mautic.example.com/oauth/v2/authorize?grant_type=authorization_code
        &client_id=CLIENT_ID
        &redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fexample.com%2Fyour-callback
        &response_type=code
        &state=UNIQUE_STATE_STRING
    
    (note that the query has been wrapped for legibility)

.. note:: 

    The state is optional but recommended to prevent ``CSRF`` attacks. It should be a uniquely generated string and stored locally in a session, cookie, etc. so you can compare it with the returned value.

.. note:: 

    Note that the ``redirect_uri`` should be URL encoded.

This prompts the User to login. Once they do, Mautic redirects them back to the URL specified in the ``redirect_uri`` with a code appended to the query.

It may look something like: ``https://example.com/your-callback?code=UNIQUE_CODE_STRING&state=UNIQUE_STATE_STRING``

You should compare the returned ``state`` against the original to ensure the request wasn't tampered with. 

Step two - replace with an access token

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 3: As above.

Obtain the value of the code from Step One, then immediately POST it back to the access token endpoint ``oauth/v2/token`` like so:

.. code-block:: console

    curl -X POST \
         -H "Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded" \
         -d "grant_type=authorization_code&client_id=CLIENT_ID&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2Fexample.com%2Fyour-callback&client_secret=CLIENT_SECRET&code=UNIQUE_CODE_STRING" \
         https://mautic.example.com/oauth/v2/token

The response returned is a JSON encoded string:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "access_token": "ACCESS_TOKEN",
        "expires_in": 3600,
        "token_type": "bearer",
        "scope": "",
        "refresh_token": "REFRESH_TOKEN"
    }

Please store this data in a secure location and use it to authenticate API requests.

Refreshing tokens

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 3: As above

* If your app doesn't request a new token using the refresh token within 14 days, you'll need to start from Step One again and redirect the User to Mautic's login.

The refresh token's expiration time is configurable through Mautic's Configuration. 

.. note::
    The app should monitor for a ``400 Bad Request`` response when requesting a new access token and redirect the User back through the authorization process if that happens.

To obtain a new access token, you should do a POST call to the access token's endpoint ``oauth/v2/token`` using the ``refresh_token`` grant type, like so:

.. code-block:: console

    curl -X POST \
         -H "Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded" \
         -d "grant_type=refresh_token&client_id=CLIENT_ID&client_secret=CLIENT_SECRET&refresh_token=REFRESH_TOKEN" \
         https://mautic.example.com/oauth/v2/token

The response returned should be a JSON encoded string:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "access_token": "NEW_ACCESS_TOKEN",
        "expires_in": 3600,
        "token_type": "bearer",
        "scope": "",
        "refresh_token": "REFRESH_TOKEN"
    }

> Client Credentials flow

Reviewer 3: I'd do a vale off / vale on around this heading, too.

=======================

Using Mautic's API library for the Client Credentials flow
----------------------------------------------------------

.. warning:: 

>     Mautic's API library doesn't have support yet for this flow, but there's an open PR that adds support: https://github.com/mautic/api-library/pull/269

Reviewer 3: Please convert this to a link macro using the `make link` command, and commit the link file.

> Using plain OAuth2 for the Client Credentials flow

Reviewer 3: Wrap this in a vale off / vale on, also

--------------------------------------------------

To obtain a new access token, make a POST request to the access token's endpoint ``oauth/v2/token`` using the ``client_credentials`` grant type.

.. code-block:: console

    curl -X POST \
         -H "Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded" \
         -d "grant_type=client_credentials&client_id=CLIENT_ID&client_secret=CLIENT_SECRET" \
         https://mautic.example.com/oauth/v2/token

The response returned should be a JSON encoded string:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "access_token": "NEW_ACCESS_TOKEN",
        "expires_in": 3600,
        "token_type": "bearer",
        "scope": ""
    }

> Authenticating the API Request

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Authenticating the API request
```

Authentication
##############

Mautic supports OAuth2 or Basic Authentication for API authentication.

Basic authentication
********************

To get started quickly with Mautic's API, you can use Basic Authentication.

.. note::

>    Mautic recommends OAuth2 for security reasons. If you still want to use Basic Authentication, you must first enable it in ``Configuration -> API Settings`` in the Mautic UI, or by setting ``'api_enable_basic_auth' => true`` in ``app/config/local.php`` directly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Mautic recommends OAuth2 for security reasons. If you still want to use Basic Authentication, you must first turn it on in ``Configuration -> API Settings`` in the Mautic UI, or by setting ``'api_enable_basic_auth' => true`` in ``config/local.php`` directly.
```

Path change, grammar change to be more inclusive.

After enabling Basic Authentication, you can use it in Mautic's API.

Using Mautic's API library with ``BasicAuth``
=============================================

.. code-block:: php

   <?php
   
   use GuzzleHttp\Client;
   use Mautic\Auth\ApiAuth;
   use Mautic\MauticApi;

   // Initiate an HTTP Client
   $httpClient = new Client([
       'timeout'  => 10,
   ]);

   // Initiate the auth object
   $settings = [
       'userName' => 'YOUR_USERNAME',
       'password' => 'YOUR_PASSWORD'
   ];
   $apiUrl = 'https://mautic.example.com';

   $initAuth = new ApiAuth($httpClient);
   $auth     = $initAuth->newAuth($settings, 'BasicAuth');
   
   $api         = new MauticApi();
   $contactsApi = $api->newApi('contacts', $auth, $apiUrl);

>    $contacts    = $contactsApi->getList();

Reviewer: @mautic/core-team I don't see this code-block anywhere in the legacy docs. Is this valid?

Reviewer 2: I think we can just link to https://github.com/mautic/api-library?tab=readme-ov-file#installing-the-api-library which will always have the up to date example?

   
.. vale off

Plain HTTP requests
===================

.. vale on

#. Combine the username and password of a Mautic User with a colon ``:``. For example, ``user:password``.

#. Base64 encode the value. For example, ``echo -n 'user:password' | base64`` results in ``dXNlcjpwYXNzd29yZA==``. The output varies based on the specific credentials used.

#. Add an Authorization header to each API request as ``Authorization: Basic dXNlcjpwYXNzd29yZA==``. Here's an example:

   .. code-block:: bash

      curl -H "Authorization: Basic dXNlcjpwYXNzd29yZA==" https://mautic.example.com/api/contacts

OAuth2
******

> After enabling Mautic's API, the **API Credentials** menu item shows up in the administrator menu. You can create a Client ID and Secret there and use them in the next steps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After turning on Mautic's API, the **API Credentials** menu item shows up in the administrator menu. Create a Client ID and Secret there, and use them in the next steps.
```

Plain HTTP requests
===================

.. vale on

1. Combine the username and password of a Mautic User with a colon ``:``. For example, ``user:password``.
2. Base64 encode this value. For example, with ``echo -n 'user:password' | base64``. This outputs something like ``dXNlcjpwYXNzd29yZA==``.
3. Add an Authorization header to each API request as ``Authorization: Basic dXNlcjpwYXNzd29yZA==``

Here's an example:

.. code-block:: console

  curl -H "Authorization: Basic dXNlcjpwYXNzd29yZA==" https://mautic.example.com/api/contacts

OAuth2
******

After enabling Mautic's API, the "API Credentials" menu item shows up in the administrator menu. You can create Client ID and Secret there, which you can then use in the next steps.

.. note:: 

    Mautic supports the ``authorization_code``, ``refresh_token`` and ``client_credentials`` grant types.

There are two main flows that Mautic supports:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Description
   * - Authorization code flow
     - This flow is best if you want Users to log in with their own Mautic accounts. All actions taken get registered as if the User performed them in Mautic's UI.
   * - Client Credentials flow

>      - This flow is best for Machine-to-Machine, M2M, communications. For example, in cron jobs that run on at fixed times of the day.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - This flow is best for Machine-to-Machine, M2M, communications. For example, in Cron jobs that run on at fixed times of the day.
```
Vale fix
